Messaging metrics (#163)
open-telemetry/semantic-conventions: docs/messaging/messaging-metrics.md

<!-- endsemconv -->

## Producer metrics

### Metric: `messaging.publish.duration`

This metric is [required][MetricRequired].

When this metric is reported alongside a messaging publish span, the metric value SHOULD be the same as the corresponding span duration.

This metric SHOULD be specified with
[`ExplicitBucketBoundaries`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/v1.26.0/specification/metrics/api.md#instrument-advice)
of `[ 0.005, 0.01, 0.025, 0.05, 0.075, 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1, 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10 ]`.

<!-- semconv metric.messaging.publish.duration(metric_table) -->
| Name     | Instrument Type | Unit (UCUM) | Description    |
| -------- | --------------- | ----------- | -------------- |
| `messaging.publish.duration` | Histogram | `s` | Measures the duration of publish operation. |
<!-- endsemconv -->

### Metric: `messaging.publish.messages`

This metric is [required][MetricRequired] when the messaging system supports batch publishing. It's [opt-in][MetricOptIn] when the messaging system does not support batch publishing, since the message count can be derived from the `messaging.publish.duration` histogram.

> _Note: The need to report `messaging.publish.messages` depends on the messaging system capabilities and not application scenarios or client library limitations. For example, RabbitMQ does not support batch publishing and corresponding instrumentations don't need to report `messaging.publish.messages`. Kafka supports both, single and batch publishing, and instrumentations MUST report `messaging.publish.messages` counter regardless of application scenarios or APIs available in the client library._

Reviewer: Maybe this entire block can be a "block quote"? Then it can come after the table, without getting too much "in the way" of the metric definition.

<!-- semconv metric.messaging.publish.messages(metric_table) -->
| Name     | Instrument Type | Unit (UCUM) | Description    |
| -------- | --------------- | ----------- | -------------- |
| `messaging.publish.messages` | Counter | `{message}` | Measures the number of published messages. |
<!-- endsemconv -->

## Consumer metrics

### Metric: `messaging.receive.duration`

> This metric is [required][MetricRequired] for poll-based receive operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This metric is [required][MetricRequired] for pull-based receive operations.
```
Or maybe a bit more verbose? 

```suggestion
This metric is [required][MetricRequired] for operations that are initiated by the application code (pull-based).
```

Author: any reason to use `pull`? Polling and poll is frequently used in the context of queues.

Author: oh, I see, we already use push in other places.

<!-- semconv metric.messaging.receive.duration(metric_table) -->
| Name     | Instrument Type | Unit (UCUM) | Description    |
| -------- | --------------- | ----------- | -------------- |
| `messaging.receive.duration` | Histogram | `s` | Measures the duration of receive operation. |
<!-- endsemconv -->

### Metric: `messaging.receive.messages`

This metric is [required][MetricRequired] for batch receive operations. It's [opt-in][MetricOptIn] when the messaging system does not support batch receive since the message count can be derived from the `messaging.receive.duration` histogram.

_Note: The need to report `messaging.receive.messages` depends on the messaging system capabilities and not application scenarios or client library limitations._

<!-- semconv metric.messaging.receive.messages(metric_table) -->
| Name     | Instrument Type | Unit (UCUM) | Description    |
| -------- | --------------- | ----------- | -------------- |
| `messaging.receive.messages` | Counter | `{message}` | Measures the number of received messages. |
<!-- endsemconv -->

### Metric: `messaging.deliver.duration`

> This metric is [required][MetricRequired] for push-based deliver operations.

Reviewer: If you decide to use the more verbose version from pull-based, maybe also adapt on this one:

```suggestion
This metric is [required][MetricRequired] for operations are not initiated by the application code (push-based deliver).
```

# Semantic Conventions for Messaging Metrics

**Status**: [Experimental][DocumentStatus]

<!-- Re-generate TOC with `markdown-toc --no-first-h1 -i` -->

<!-- toc -->

- [Common attributes](#common-attributes)
- [Producer metrics](#producer-metrics)
  * [Metric: `messaging.publish.duration`](#metric-messagingpublishduration)
  * [Metric: `messaging.publish.messages`](#metric-messagingpublishmessages)
- [Consumer metrics](#consumer-metrics)
  * [Metric: `messaging.receive.duration`](#metric-messagingreceiveduration)
  * [Metric: `messaging.receive.messages`](#metric-messagingreceivemessages)
  * [Metric: `messaging.deliver.duration`](#metric-messagingdeliverduration)
  * [Metric: `messaging.deliver.messages`](#metric-messagingdelivermessages)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Common attributes

> All messaging metric share the same set of attributes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All messaging metrics share the same set of attributes:
```

| [`messaging.destination.template`](../attributes-registry/messaging.md) | string | Low cardinality representation of the messaging destination name [5] | `/customers/{customerId}` | Conditionally Required: if available. |
| [`messaging.system`](../attributes-registry/messaging.md) | string | A string identifying the messaging system. | `kafka`; `rabbitmq`; `rocketmq`; `activemq`; `AmazonSQS` | Required |
| [`network.protocol.name`](../attributes-registry/network.md) | string | [OSI application layer](https://osi-model.com/application-layer/) or non-OSI equivalent. [6] | `amqp`; `mqtt` | Recommended |
| [`network.protocol.version`](../attributes-registry/network.md) | string | Version of the protocol specified in `network.protocol.name`. [7] | `3.1.1` | Recommended |
| [`network.transport`](../attributes-registry/network.md) | string | [OSI transport layer](https://osi-model.com/transport-layer/) or [inter-process communication method](https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Inter-process_communication). [8] | `tcp`; `udp` | Recommended |

> | [`network.type`](../attributes-registry/network.md) | string | [OSI network layer](https://osi-model.com/network-layer/) or non-OSI equivalent. [9] | `ipv4`; `ipv6` | Recommended |

Reviewer 2: Do we see value in having those dimensions on metrics? We don't have them on HTTP metrics.

Author: good point, removed

Author: we should get back to it in the scope of https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/963 and review anything network-related we put on logical spans/metrics

| `pipe` | Named or anonymous pipe. |
| `unix` | Unix domain socket |

`network.type` has the following list of well-known values. If one of them applies, then the respective value MUST be used, otherwise a custom value MAY be used.

| Value  | Description |
|---|---|
| `ipv4` | IPv4 |
| `ipv6` | IPv6 |
<!-- endsemconv -->

## Producer metrics

### Metric: `messaging.publish.duration`

This metric is [required][MetricRequired].

When this metric is reported alongside a messaging publish span, the metric value SHOULD be the same as the corresponding span duration.

This metric SHOULD be specified with
[`ExplicitBucketBoundaries`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/v1.26.0/specification/metrics/api.md#instrument-advice)
of `[ 0.005, 0.01, 0.025, 0.05, 0.075, 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1, 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10 ]`.

<!-- semconv metric.messaging.publish.duration(metric_table) -->
| Name     | Instrument Type | Unit (UCUM) | Description    |
| -------- | --------------- | ----------- | -------------- |
| `messaging.publish.duration` | Histogram | `s` | Measures the duration of publish operation. |
<!-- endsemconv -->

### Metric: `messaging.publish.messages`

> This metric is [required][MetricRequired] when messaging system supports batch publishing. It's [opt-in][MetricOptIn] when messaging system does not support batch publishing since message count can be derived from `messaging.publish.duration` histogram.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This metric is [required][MetricRequired] when the messaging system supports batch publishing. It's [opt-in][MetricOptIn] when the messaging system does not support batch publishing, since message count can be derived from the `messaging.publish.duration` histogram.
```

_Note: The need to report `messaging.publish.messages` depends on the messaging system capabilities and not application scenarios or client library limitations.

> For example, RabbitMQ does not support batch publishing and corresponding instrumentations don't need to report `messaging.publish.messages`. Kafka supports both, single and batch publishing, and instrumentations MUST report `messaging.publish.messages` counter regardless of application scenarios or APIs available in the client library.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, RabbitMQ does not support batch publishing and corresponding instrumentations don't need to report `messaging.publish.messages`. Kafka supports both, single and batch publishing, and instrumentations MUST report `messaging.publish.messages` counter regardless of application scenarios or APIs available in the client library._
```

<!-- semconv metric.messaging.publish.messages(metric_table) -->
| Name     | Instrument Type | Unit (UCUM) | Description    |
| -------- | --------------- | ----------- | -------------- |
| `messaging.publish.messages` | Counter | `{message}` | Measures the number of published messages. |
<!-- endsemconv -->

## Consumer metrics

### Metric: `messaging.receive.duration`

> This metric is [required][MetricRequired] when messaging system supports poll-based receive operations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This metric is [required][MetricRequired] for poll-based receive operations.
```

A nit, but it almost sounds as if this metric is required if "receive" operations are supported by system, regardless of whether the users uses it.

This metric SHOULD be specified with
[`ExplicitBucketBoundaries`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/v1.26.0/specification/metrics/api.md#instrument-advice)
of `[ 0.005, 0.01, 0.025, 0.05, 0.075, 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1, 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10 ]`.

When this metric is reported alongside a messaging receive span, the metric value SHOULD be the same as the corresponding span duration.

<!-- semconv metric.messaging.receive.duration(metric_table) -->
| Name     | Instrument Type | Unit (UCUM) | Description    |
| -------- | --------------- | ----------- | -------------- |
| `messaging.receive.duration` | Histogram | `s` | Measures the duration of receive operation. |
<!-- endsemconv -->

### Metric: `messaging.receive.messages`

> This metric is [required][MetricRequired] when messaging system supports batch receive. It's [opt-in][MetricOptIn] when messaging system does not support batch receive since message count can be derived from `messaging.receive.duration` histogram.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This metric is [required][MetricRequired] when the messaging system supports batch receive. It's [opt-in][MetricOptIn] when the messaging system does not support batch receive since the message count can be derived from the `messaging.receive.duration` histogram.
```

> _Note: The need to report `messaging.receive.messages` depends on the messaging system capabilities and not application scenarios or client library limitations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_Note: The need to report `messaging.receive.messages` depends on the messaging system capabilities and not application scenarios or client library limitations._
```

<!-- semconv metric.messaging.receive.messages(metric_table) -->
| Name     | Instrument Type | Unit (UCUM) | Description    |
| -------- | --------------- | ----------- | -------------- |
| `messaging.receive.messages` | Counter | `{message}` | Measures the number of received messages. |
<!-- endsemconv -->

### Metric: `messaging.deliver.duration`

> This metric is [required][MetricRequired] when messaging system supports poll-based receive operations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This metric is [required][MetricRequired] for push-based deliver operations.
```

When this metric is reported alongside a messaging deliver span, the metric value SHOULD be the same as the corresponding span duration.

This metric SHOULD be specified with
[`ExplicitBucketBoundaries`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/v1.26.0/specification/metrics/api.md#instrument-advice)
of `[ 0.005, 0.01, 0.025, 0.05, 0.075, 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1, 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10 ]`.

<!-- semconv metric.messaging.deliver.duration(metric_table) -->
| Name     | Instrument Type | Unit (UCUM) | Description    |
| -------- | --------------- | ----------- | -------------- |
| `messaging.deliver.duration` | Histogram | `s` | Measures the duration of deliver operation. |
<!-- endsemconv -->

### Metric: `messaging.deliver.messages`

> This metric is [required][MetricRequired] when messaging system supports batch delivery. It's [opt-in][MetricOptIn] when messaging system does not support batch delivery since message count can be derived from `messaging.deliver.duration` histogram.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This metric is [required][MetricRequired] when the messaging system supports batch delivery. It's [opt-in][MetricOptIn] when the messaging system does not support batch delivery since the message count can be derived from the `messaging.deliver.duration` histogram.
```

> _Note: The need to report `messaging.deliver.messages` depends on the messaging system capabilities and not application scenarios or client library limitations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_Note: The need to report `messaging.deliver.messages` depends on the messaging system capabilities and not application scenarios or client library limitations._
```

# Semantic Conventions for Messaging Metrics

**Status**: [Experimental][DocumentStatus]

<!-- Re-generate TOC with `markdown-toc --no-first-h1 -i` -->

<!-- toc -->

- [Producer metrics](#producer-metrics)
  * [Metric: `messaging.publish.duration`](#metric-messagingpublishduration)
  * [Metric: `messaging.publish.messages`](#metric-messagingpublishmessages)

> - [Consumer metrics](#consumer-metrics)

Reviewer 3: I think it would be helpful to explain how the time from a message being fetched from the broker to being settled on the broker is divided up. For example, if the client fetches a bunch of messages they might be processed progressively, some of them being temporarily enqueued in the client until they're dispatched for processing. Where does this time waiting for dispatch get accounted for, if at all?

Author: absolutely, created https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/issues/218 to design observability story for it.

Reviewer 2: This is an important observability tasks, however, I'd strongly suggest to leave this out of the scope of v1.0 of messaging semantics. As with traces, I'd be in favor of focusing on operations embedded in the user application code (deliver callbacks, receive operations), and in a next step (post v1) go deeper and observe what the client SDKs do under the hood (pre-fetching before deliver calls, or during receive calls).

  * [Metric: `messaging.receive.duration`](#metric-messagingreceiveduration)
  * [Metric: `messaging.receive.messages`](#metric-messagingreceivemessages)
  * [Metric: `messaging.deliver.duration`](#metric-messagingdeliverduration)
  * [Metric: `messaging.deliver.messages`](#metric-messagingdelivermessages)
  * [Metric: `messaging.settle.duration`](#metric-messagingsettleduration)
  * [Metric: `messaging.settle.messages`](#metric-messagingsettlemessages)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Producer metrics

### Metric: `messaging.publish.duration`

This metric is [required][MetricRequired].

> When this metric is reported alongside an messaging publish span, the metric value SHOULD be the same as the corresponding span duration.

Reviewer 3: "an messaging" should read "a messaging".

> When this metric is reported alongside an messaging publish span, the metric value SHOULD be the same as the corresponding span duration.

Reviewer 3: Is there any view about how transactions would play into this? Many systems have transactional publish and settlement.

Author: This is a great question for messaging  SIG, but out of the scope of this PR.
In Azure systems, transactions don't change the timing of operations, but add additional scope for the broker. While it may be useful to have transaction-oriented metrics, this is not something we currently support in otel and needs a lot of research and prototyping.

Author: created an issue to track it https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/issues/264

This metric SHOULD be specified with

> [`ExplicitBucketBoundaries`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/v1.21.0/specification/metrics/api.md#instrument-advice)

Author: exponential histograms can be configured by users - instrumentations report histograms and can advise typical boundaries for them. Then users can overwrite this configuration and choose exponential histograms.

The boundaries in this PR were taken from HTTP requests. While we might need to adjust them (HTTP requests are per try and these are per all tries), I'd postpone doing it until we have some metrics prototypes.

of `[ 0, 0.005, 0.01, 0.025, 0.05, 0.075, 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1, 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10 ]`.

<!-- semconv metric.messaging.publish.duration(metric_table) -->
| Name     | Instrument Type | Unit (UCUM) | Description    |
| -------- | --------------- | ----------- | -------------- |
| `messaging.publish.duration` | Histogram | `s` | Measures the duration of publish operation. |
<!-- endsemconv -->

<!-- semconv metric.messaging.publish.duration(full) -->
| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `messaging.system` | string | A string identifying the messaging system. | `kafka`; `rabbitmq`; `rocketmq`; `activemq`; `AmazonSQS` | Required |

> | `messaging.status.code` | string | The status of the operation. [1] | `OK`; `ERROR`; `TIMEOUT` | Required |

Author: this is a great question. There is an open discussion on it - https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/3243. So we'll either 
1. ask specific messaging systems to introduce specific attributes like messaging.kafka.status.code` plus add a general-purpose status code to know if an error has happened 
2.. or put system-specific things into `messaging.status.code`.

While there is no consensus, we discussed not blocking this for now and doing p2 - there is a now below that instrumentations are encouraged to put their custom error codes there.

the broker does not have such notion, the destination name SHOULD uniquely identify the broker.

**[3]:** if and only if `messaging.destination.name` is known to have low cardinality. Otherwise, `messaging.destination.template` MAY be populated.

**[4]:** Destination names could be constructed from templates. An example would be a destination name involving a user name or product id. Although the destination name in this case is of high cardinality, the underlying template is of low cardinality and can be effectively used for grouping and aggregation.

**[5]:** `network.protocol.version` refers to the version of the protocol used and might be different from the protocol client's version. If the HTTP client used has a version of `0.27.2`, but sends HTTP version `1.1`, this attribute should be set to `1.1`.

`messaging.status.code` has the following list of well-known values. If one of them applies, then the respective value MUST be used, otherwise a custom value MAY be used.

| Value  | Description |
|---|---|
| `OK` | Operation succeeded. |
| `ERROR` | Operation failed. |

> | `UNSET` | Operation result is not known. |

Reviewer 3: The table above for this attribute has "TIMEOUT" as a value, but not "UNSET". Probably ought to be consistent.

<!-- endsemconv -->

### Metric: `messaging.publish.messages`

This metric is [required][MetricRequired] when messaging system supports batch publishing. For the systems that support single-message publishing only, message count can be derived from `messaging.publish.duration` histogram, but instrumentation MAY report `messaging.publish.messages` anyway.

> _Note: The need to report `messaging.publish.message` depends on the messaging system capabilities and not application scenarios or client library limitations.

Reviewer 3: `messaging.publish.messages` (s) missing.

### Metric: `messaging.publish.messages`

This metric is [required][MetricRequired] when the messaging system supports batch publishing. It's [opt-in][MetricOptIn] when the messaging system does not support batch publishing, since message count can be derived from the `messaging.publish.duration` histogram.

_Note: The need to report `messaging.publish.messages` depends on the messaging system capabilities and not application scenarios or client library limitations.

> For example, RabbitMQ does not support batch publishing and corresponding instrumentations don't need to report `messaging.publish.messages`. Kafka supports both, single and batch publishing, and instrumentations MUST report `messaging.publish.messages` counter regardless of application scenarios or APIs available in the client library._

Reviewer 4: Is that a typo? `... library._`
